>> My name is Brady Eldson, I'm a software
engineer on the Safari and Web Kit team.
First I want to ask you a quick question.
How many of you have developed
real applications for the desktop.
A lot of hands.
OK. How many of you have developed web
applications that run in a browser.
A lot of the same hands.
And for that one guy way in the back who
didn't raise his hand for the web app question,
I'm going to talk about really quick what a web app is.
The web started out with single web pages.
Throw some HTML up on the screen, some images, some
bouncing marquees and banners and call it a day.
After a little bit we started to get what we call web
sites, collections of pages on the same topic that were --
the same kind of methodology, just throwing it
out there and making things a little more complex.
As browsers and web technology evolved, things started
to get a lot more organized, a lot more dynamic,
and we started to call these collections web applications.
Now with modern browsers and modern standards really
turbo charging what these web applications can do.
So it's a lot more like what you desktop
application developers are used to developing.
With technologies like font face and SVG
fonts, and great new text editing APIs.
Rich media, and desktop-like UI experiences with the
audio and video elements, and accessibility support.
All the cool image effects and graphics effects
you can do with CSS masks and transforms
and gradients and animations, all that cool stuff.
The data of the application yourself, we're giving
you the turbo charged nitro JavaScript engine,
and we're giving you great developer tools to make
developing a web application feel a lot more real.
But there's been one thing missing here.
What about the data.
Some of you might be saying what data.
Well, what about your application's
data, the state of the application,
where in the middle of a long running procedure
was your application, what was it doing,
where were the windows, how were they set up.
How about the resources to make up the application itself.
Your markup, your style, your scripts,
and then there's your user's data.
Your users probably have a preferred way
of using or viewing your application.
So all their preferences and settings.
And in many of your applications your users are
generating content right there in the browser.
So all this data has to go somewhere.
And typically it's been on a server somewhere, right?
The application resources themselves,
they come from a server,
and then we're used to shipping data back off to a server.
Well, users have machines.
Sometimes they're brand new hot machines, sometimes
they're machines that have been around a little bit.
And the machines really take all sorts of forms, right?
And all these machines have something in common.
They all have some sort of local storage.
Disc drive, solid state flash drives.
And we want to give you a standard way to
access that and use it to its full potential.
Standard way.
We love working with web standards,
Apple work, has been working closely
with the WHAT Working Group in W3C on the HTML 5 standard.
And we're trying to bring these technologies forward
in Safari and in a standard interoperable way
that hopefully everyone will be implementing.
And everything I'm going talk to you about -- to you today,
is available in Safari 4 that was released on Monday,
on Mac, on Windows, and in iPhone OS 3.0.
So we're going to talk a little more about data on the web.
We have some new solutions, but this is an old problem.
So we're going to talk a little bit about the ingenious
ways you as developers have been managing the data so far.
Then we'll jump into our first
standard, the HTML 5 Key/Value storage.
It comes in a couple flavors that
do a couple cool different things.
Then we'll get into the power of the HTML 5
structure databases, some really cool, powerful stuff.
A relational database in the browser,
accessible through JavaScript.
And then we'll cap it off with a little discussion about
the HTML 5 application cache, which is all the resources
that make up your application living in a
predictable way inside of your user's browser.
So data on the web.
Right now there's all this data flinging around.
I've gone over most of it, the application resources, the
data your application needs, the data your users generate.
And there hasn't been a good solution
for how to wrangle all this data.
You as developers have come up with some
pretty creative solutions in the meantime.
Ways of handling the data in the
absence of a better alternative.
For example, cookies.
Cookies were invented as part of the HTTP
spec for shipping data automatically back
and forth between the server and the web browser.
They're great for that, they'll always be great for that.
But they're more fragile than some of you might think.
The cookie standard says that a browser can be very limited
in the cookies it supports, it can prune them any time.
You might set an expiration date far off in the
future and assume it will be there years from now.
In most cases, it won't be.
There's severe limits on the sizes of cookies, and they're
just too limited and fragile when it comes down to it.
What about the cloud.
Sending data through the Internet to
a server somewhere that you control.
This is very important, and it will continue
to be important, using form data to post,
using query strings in URLs, or shipping data off
with an XMLHttpRequest to a server you control.
The problem here is the network is fundamentally unreliable
compared to knowing what's going on on the local machine.
The network is slow compared to how data
is transferred around within the machine.
You have to control the server.
You have to manage it.
You have to keep it up-to-date.
And really, it's just too complex and
expensive for a lot of the solutions you
as developers really need to -- really need.
And then there's plug-ins.
Many of you have turned to some popular plug-ins, some
unpopular plug-ins, and sometimes your own custom plug-ins
to store small nuggets of data in the user's
web browser, or to store large volumes of data.
The problem with plug-ins is that they
don't integrate into the browser very well.
Each plug-in has their own UI that the user has
to access outside of the browser standard UI.
Plug-ins might have different bugs on different platforms.
And if they do have different bugs in different
platforms, you either have to be in control of the plug-in
and debug on all the different platforms,
or you have to talk to the vendor,
and some users might not have the plug-in, and
some users just don't want to browse with plug-ins,
and some plug-ins may be slow to load out of the
browser space, and there's just all these problems.
They're just not standard web technology.
Some of you might be overwhelmed right now.
You're saying to yourself, I never
thought about it all that way.
What should I be looking for.
When we're manipulating simple data, what's an ideal world.
Manipulating simple data should
be fast and it should be easy.
Back to the cookies example, where we're
storing small nuggets of data in cookies.
How many of you are familiar with writing a cookie
parsing string just to get a document.cookies.
See a few hands come up.
Have fun with that, some time, if you haven't tried it.
It's ridiculous just for Key/Value pairs of data.
So it should be a lot easier than that.
And then with more complex data, we need to be flexible.
We need to be able to handle any size of data,
any complexity of data, data with structure.
And it needs to be just in a built in native way in
the browser, standard -- standard base way, hopefully.
And it also needs to be fast.
Modern users aren't going to wait
for anything, in the web browser
or on the desktop application, it's the same to them.
If your page is locking up the browser or taking a long time
to complete something, they're not going to put up with it.
So even large amounts of complex data needs to be fast.
And no matter what kind of data we're
manipulating, it needs to be persistent and secure.
We need to know if we want it to be there ten years
from now, it will be there ten years from now.
It needs to be secure.
We need to know that our web application
and our users are in control of our data,
and are the only ones who have access to it.
So with these things in mind, I'd like to talk
to you about the HTML 5 Key/Value storage system.
Key/Value storage is about a simple way to
manipulate simple data in JavaScript in the browser.
Data that will be persistent and accessible to you a
long time from now and off line with no network required.
In the Key/Value storage API, data items are
Key/Value pairs, much like in a cookie string,
or if you're familiar with using
LocalStorage in Flash, for example.
It's the same type of data.
And it's really simple to manipulate.
The way the Key/Value storage works,
and I'll get into it in just a minute,
it just integrates into the JavaScript language natively.
It feels like -- you're just using JavaScript.
If you know how to use JavaScript you
already know how to use Key/Value storage.
So it's really great.
It has origin-based security.
This has been the standard security model on the
web and it's being really formalized in HTML 5.
All this means is that documents and web pages from your
web server, your domain, HTTP, your protocol, your port,
they are the only ones who can get at this data.
So if you set a Key/Value pair item, you
will be the only one who can get at it later.
It comes in two varieties, which I'll
go into a little more detail on shortly.
The SessionStorage and LocalStorage.
They attack two different problems, and together
they really replace both plug-ins and cookies
for manipulating any simple data you
have to throw at your application.
And finally, it has some events.
So you can listen to changes in the keys
and the values in different documents
different frames, and really keep things in sync.
So what are these two mysterious
things I've touched on a couple
of times now, the SessionStorage and the LocalStorage.
These are the two objects that you'll access
in script to get at the Key/Value storage API.
Each of them does something different.
SessionStorage.
Now I was booking a vacation earlier this year.
I had a couple of weeks off.
I wanted to go to Boston, I wanted to
go to Paris, I wanted to go to London.
I opened up my favorite travel web site in a couple
different browser Windows, found the perfect flight to Paris
in one, the perfect flight to London in the other, and
then I clicked purchase on both and checked my e-mail
and I was the proud owner of two tickets to Paris.
What happened?
What happened was they were using
cookies to manage my session.
Now a lot of the time this is important to manage
a session between the browser and the server.
But when the session is only important
within the browser, they're overkill,
and they have this fundamental
problem is that they're global.
So SessionStorage replaces cookies for
session tracking, and the way it does this is
by giving you one session per browser
window per browser or tap.
So I would have gotten one ticket
to Paris, one ticket to London.
I would have been on my way for two weeks of
fun instead of one week of the same fun twice.
And the LocalStorage object is using the same API to
persistently pin down some data inside of the browser.
It is persistent on the disc, on the Flash device.
It is global.
SessionStorage is per browser tab or window,
LocalStorage is accessible in every browser tab or window.
Quite deliberately.
So how do we use it.
SessionStorage, for example here,
the exact same API for LocalStorage.
Call set item.
First argument is the key, second argument is the value.
Or you can use array property access in JavaScript that
you're probably familiar with to do the same thing.
The key inside the brackets equals the value.
Or.property access, if it's a static
property that you know beforehand.
All these three statements right
here do the exact same thing.
Just integrates right into the language,
getting at an item, exact same thing in reverse.
You can iterate over all the items
in either the SessionStorage
or LocalStorage object using a
standard JavaScript loop, four loop.
You can use get item here or the bracket property access.
You can remove items with removeItem,
or built right into the language,
go ahead and delete the property off the object.
You can clear the entire thing out in
one fell swoop with the clear method.
And that's it.
We're on our way, storing simple Key/Value
pair nuggets of data in our user's browser.
Now there's the events I mentioned
earlier, they're kind of cool.
They help you keep tabs and windows in sync,
like I side, whether it's within one tab
or window for SessionStorage, or
over all of them for LocalStorage.
They set whenever any item changes.
So when you set a new item, when
you change it, when you delete it.
And it's sent out to keep different documents in sync.
And it's sent to all the documents that are
open in the web browser with the same origin,
the same domain that you control,
that your web app is served from.
And like I mentioned, with SessionStorage it's sent to
each frame in the current page within the current session.
And with LocalStorage, to every frame in every
page, because everyone can get at LocalStorage.
The event has -- oh, I'm sorry, to listen to the event
at event listener, the name of the event is storage.
Or you can go ahead and use the on
storage attribute on the body element.
And once you have the event it has everything
you need to know about what happened.
The new key -- I'm sorry, the key, the old value,
the new value, and then you can find out a little bit
about where the event was generated from.
And that's it for the entire API and the entire
event system, SessionStorage and LocalStorage.
It's so simple to use, builds right into the language.
It's a great tool.
To show you a demo of something that we've been working on,
I'd like to invite my esteemed
colleague Beth Dakin up on stage.
[ Applause ]
>> Thanks Brady, that was great.
So Brady and I love playing checkers.
We play whenever we have free time.
We play on evenings, weekends, we play on lunch
breaks, holidays, we are 24-7 checkers playing fiends.
So we decided to get together and write
a little checkers web application.
So I'm going to show you what we have, and I'm going to
tell you how we want to enhance it with LocalStorage.
So let me see.
There we go.
OK, so here's our checkers application.
And I'll give you a little tour.
Down here we have turn indicator lights.
So I'm blue and I go first, and the computer is green.
And then we have a few buttons down here.
The first button is a New Game button
to start a new game at any point.
And then these other two buttons represent the LocalStorage
features that we want to add to our web application.
First is the Manage Games button, which will
autosave games as we play using LocalStorage,
so they will be saved locally on the machine.
And you can manually save a game at any
point and have a copy stored locally.
And then the High Scores button will keep
track of high scores as you play over time.
So you will have a copy of that data, and
you can see how you improve over time.
So the game itself, we made it kind of extra fun
with these CSS -- sweet, achievement unlocked.
We made it extra fun with all these CSS things
and -- oh man, that was such a stupid move.
Brady, I wish that we had implemented saved games already so
I wouldn't have to look like an idiot in front of everybody.
I was playing earlier today and I was doing so well.
>> OK, so Beth, actually last night after
we finished playing, like, at midnight,
and we had gone for three hours playing checkers,
I actually took a few minutes before going to bed
and actually implemented the Auto Save feature.
>> No way.
>> So your game from earlier today might actually be there.
>> Oh my God.
There it is.
From 10:56 this morning.
And here is an autosaved game from me playing just now.
That is so sweet.
How did you do it, Brady?
>> Well, you've got the code.
I think you probably know where I implemented it.
Go check it out.
>> True, true.
OK, so I'm guessing that Brady did
this in our game_manager.JS file.
And yes, sure enough he fleshed out our save
and restore functions which were empty before.
And you can see it was this simple for him to save a game.
He just had to add a few Key/Value
pairs to the LocalStorage object.
Just enough data to fully restore a game.
So you know, the first one you can see is he takes
player 0 and stores an array of the positions of all
of the board pieces, the checkers, at that time.
And then a few other pieces of information, like the
same data for player 1, enough data to restore the game.
And then the restore function just retrieves
that information from the LocalStorage object,
and does the right thing with all of our member
variables to get everything in the right state.
So let's load that game.
I was doing really well.
Yes! All right, and now just to show you
-- I can manually save this game too.
So now I have another copy of it there.
And I'm just going to play a little checkers.
And I won.
Yes!
[ Applause ]
>> OK, so you can see that here this
immediately brought me to the High Scores page.
And it put in my awesome game data for me to remember.
But we haven't implemented high scores
yet, unless Brady did that last night too.
>> I had to go to sleep and be refreshed.
>> I didn't think so.
So as soon as I close this window or navigate
away from the page, open a new window,
go back to my checkers game, that data is lost.
So let's implement high scores right now, shall we?
So I'm going to go to my high scores.JS file.
Here we're doing all this stuff to pop
up the panel that contains all the data.
But right now as you saw, that data
is lost once we start a new session.
So set score.
Let's do that first.
Have it over here.
OK, so here we just have a very small function, again,
where returning early for browsers
that don't support LocalStorage.
That's just a good backwards compatible move.
And then down here we're just storing the
name and score in the LocalStorage object,
and then load score which will be
called wherever we show that panel,
the high scores panel, we just need to retrieve that data.
There we go.
So let's see this in action.
Oops. Let's refresh my board.
Let's go back to that sweet game.
I'm going to try to save this again.
OK, now if I close the window, open it again, go back to
checkers, then my high score is saved for all eternity.
[ Applause ]
>> And you know, that's all.
Just to implement those two really cool features, to add
them to my web application, just a few lines of code.
So back to slides.
Thanks, Brady.
>> Thank you very much, Beth.
So that was pretty cool.
So now that we have those implemented, when we're
playing one on one we can compare our results later
and continue the argument about whose better at checkers.
So -- so what Beth showed you is that LocalStorage
just integrates right into the language.
We used a few different forms of accessing LocalStorage.
I prefer the array property access.
They all work the same.
But it just builds right into JavaScript.
And really, we're saving the application state locally.
That's the key.
The high scores, the saved games, where
the user is in the middle of the game.
We can quit the browser, come back, it's
stored there in a predictable way on the disc,
it was all done just using straight forward JavaScript.
That is Key/Value storage in a nut shell.
New HTML 5 standard, standard way
to manipulate data in the browser.
But some of you have different kinds of data.
More complex data.
You have data with structure.
You have relational data and you
have massive amounts of data.
So what can we give you?
We can give you the HTML 5 structured databases.
These are a database inside of the web browser
that you can use to store complex data off line.
For example, let's take a look at a calendar.
This is one type of data we might
want to enhance using databases.
We have a lot of different events,
each event has a lot of rich data.
We have relationships between the events, we want to select
from different calendars for different types of views.
This is a Mobile Me calendar,
it does not have this feature.
But last year we implemented an off line calendar.
It's available on webkit.org if
you guys want to check it out.
It does have this feature.
We're storing calendar data off line and
it's just really easy to enhance features
of the calendar by using database queries on the data.
And it's all written in the same
JavaScript most of you are familiar with.
A mail application.
Another type of data that would -- is commonly used
in a web application that could be enhanced by storing
or caching a local copy of the
data inside of the user's browser.
So structured databases HTML 5
standard way to do all of that.
And it is real-world SQL.
The same SQL that you're used to using -- many of
you anyway, are used to using on your web servers
in applications using database programming.
It is the real world SQL that you're familiar with.
Is asynchronous and callback-based.
Remember, two things are very important to us.
I'm sorry -- one thing that is
very important to us was the speed.
Was making sure that the user never feels our
pain as developers of wrangling lots of data.
So the way we achieved that with the database
API is by making everything callback based.
So it's running in the background while your user
continue to interact with your web application.
It has the same origin-based security, that
is the standard security model on the web.
And that is very explicitly defined
in the Key/Value storage.
This means the same thing, documents from
your domain have their own set of databases
that they can access and no one else can touch them.
So I kind of tried to reiterate on this point a little bit.
What do I mean by real world SQL.
I mean real world SQL.
There are tables.
There are rows of data.
There's definitely indexes, you bet there's
triggers, and there are transactions.
They're built into the API.
We do not let you forget about the transactions.
They're important to keep things fast and
keep things efficient and the database small.
So what are some advantages of storing our data locally.
Well, first off, it works off line, right?
That's the key of this talk, the off line data aspect.
A lot of the time, in fact, most of the time, table,
it's still going to be very important to ship data back
to a server that you can control, so it's
accessible from multiple places, multiple browsers.
But I bet a lot of you can find a lot
of ways where it makes sense to store
and cache a local copy of the data inside of the browser.
And that data will be available off line.
You won't need a network connection to
any server to get at all this rich data.
What about some performance enhancements
we get from doing this.
By keeping the data local we get a great speed boost.
For a lot of the time when we just need to cache data, or
just need to perform a local query on data that makes sense
that we have cached locally, when we
take the network out of the equation,
that's just a fantastic boon for
performance and responsiveness.
Take the latency out of the question.
And for battery life.
We have notebooks, we have the iPhone, and
other mobile devices that support this.
Take the network out, take the radio out.
That's fantastic.
And in the cases where it makes sense to cache some of the
data locally inside of the browser, there's less complexity.
We don't have to set up a connection to
the server using your favorite flavor
of connection, be it a host or an XMLHttpRequest.
Taking that out of the equation and
just running the SQL right on the --
right on your user's machine can help take
a little complexity out of the equation.
So back to the mail example.
You know, I ride the train to work many mornings,
and a lot of the times there's no network connection,
be it on my phone because we're going through
tunnels or we're in the middle of the wilderness,
the trains around here don't necessarily have Wi-Fi yet.
It's sad, being Silicon Valley and all.
But it's coming.
But until then, I want to download
my mail at home, hit the train,
and then be able to compose replies
on the way to work, for example.
Very important replies, about pictures
of cute puppies and kittens.
So let's talk through how we might augment a
mail web application to do something like this.
The first -- this is just going to be a
scrape of the surface of the database API.
But we're just going to walk through
the workflow of how you might use it.
So first we're going to need a database handle
This is the entry point into the HTML 5 database's API.
There's an open database method on the window,
called an openDatabase with a few nuggets of data,
and you have a database handle ready to go.
The important piece of data here for all of you who just
want to cut to the chase is the name of your database.
Your origin, your dmain that you
control has its own set of databases.
And you can create individual named
databases within that set.
So here we're going to go ahead and call it off line mail.
So we have our off line mail database handle.
The entry point into actually doing something with
our database handle is the transaction method.
Like I said, transactions are built into the API.
We do not let you ignore them.
And they are how you get things done.
And this is also the first time you're going
to see the callbacks I was calling about.
This API is asynchronous and callback-based.
So you will often be passing in JavaScript functions as
callbacks for the browser to notify when certain parts
of the database operation are progressing or complete.
The most important one here.
You can go ahead and ignore the
error callback or the completion one.
The most important one is the transaction callback.
When you call database stop transaction you're getting a
transaction object that is a guarantee that you're ready
to go, performing SQL queries inside the database.
Here's an example of a transaction callback.
Given the transaction object.
I have some SQL to run.
And now for the first time in this chain of
events I am actually running an SQL query inside
of the browser using JavaScript.
I'm going to go ahead and create a messages
table in my off line mail database here.
There is an alternate form of SQL for arguments.
As you know, the database sanitization considerations, a
lot of the time we want to put place holders in our query,
we use question marks for the place holders.
That's written into the standard.
And then for each question mark you have, you
pass in an array of arguments and each member
of the array replaces one of the question marks.
So now we're actually putting a message into our database.
We need to get stuff out of the database, of course.
And the way you do that is with the
very important statement callback.
This is another form of SQL, and
when you expect to get results out,
you need to pass in a statement callback function.
When that SQL statement is done executing,
this callback will be called with the results
that were pulled out of the database, if there were any.
And it also gives you a chance to continue
a chain of statements in this transaction.
So that's it.
Like I said, I was scraping the
surface of how the database API works.
It is a rich API, and I just want
to give you a sense of the flow.
To really understand it and to get to know
it well, it's great to look at examples.
This is the off line calendar that we implemented last year.
It's now available on webkit.org.
And it has a lot of great code you can look at.
This is all what has now become a semi famous example, the
sticky notes, which is probably overkill for database usage.
But that makes it a great educational example because it's
really simple to see where the database operations fit
in to just creating and editing sticky notes.
Now many of you that are familiar with database
programming sometimes like to get down to the metal
and log into the database and just run queries directly.
Not in code, just tinker around in
the database and know what's going on.
And Safari's great web inspector will let you do that.
In the web inspector there's this -- let me back up there.
There's this databases panel.
Any time you are at a page that has databases you can go in
and click on the databases tab
and see what's going on there.
It will just give you a view of the first
few rows in the database to see what the --
what the rows in the table are,
what data is in there right now.
It's pretty cool.
And then like I said, you want to get down
to the metal and run some SQL queries,
and the inspector will let you do that too.
You can see here, we're playing around
with our Web Kit sticky notes example,
and we're just poking around in the
database, just like any other SQL database.
Pretty cool stuff.
So that was an overview of the HTML 5 structured databases.
Like I said, those great examples are great to look at.
And you can look at the documentation to
really flesh out your understanding of it.
But it is a standard way, HTML 5 standard way to manipulate
structured relational data inside the web browser.
Some of you might be asking yourselves
well, what else can I store off line.
I'm storing simple Key/Value nuggets
of data with using LocalStorage,
and I'm storing rich structured
data using the databases API.
Is there anything else I could do.
And there's something very important you could do.
And that is the HTML 5 application cache.
The application cache has really caught on since we
introduced it in the Safari 4 developer preview last year,
and other browsers are starting to implement it.
It's a fantastic idea.
It's storing all of the different resources
that make up your application off line.
The mark up, the style, the scripting, the images and
other media, storing them in a reliable manner inside
of the web browser, so that the web browser
knows how to load your web application,
even when the network is completely absent.
The application cache requires you to
put together a manifest of resources.
It's a list of all the different
URLs that go into your application.
That's a new object that you can poke at and tinker
with to monitor how the application cache is working.
It's -- it's a simple object, but it gives you some
important insight as to how the mechanism is working.
I'll touch on that a little more later.
And importantly, to me, anyway, and a lot
of the developers that we've heard from,
the application cache has an automated
atomic update mechanism.
Automatically, when a network connection is available, the
web browser will go to your web server in the background,
see if there's an update to your web application,
and start downloading it in the background.
And then when it's time, it will
perform the update atomically.
In college, a lot of times I was editing really complex
web sites and you know, refresh things in the browser,
and things were all broken to hell, because it got
Version 1 of one file, but Version 2 of another file.
Application cache would love to
just get rid of that problem.
The updates will be atomic in a predictable manner.
And finally there's also a mechanism
to monitor on line and off line status.
So you know when you have that network connection and
when you definitely don't have that network connection.
Because a lot of the time, a web
application why trying to behave
like a full-fledged first-class citizen
desktop application really would
like to change its behavior based
on whether it's online or off line.
Present a different UI, take certain
features in, certain features out.
So now we can start to do that in a pretty cool way.
So this resource manifest.
Let me get back on this.
This is a pretty important part of things.
It is a text file.
It is a text file that has a list of every
URL your application needs to operate.
When you're using the application cache mechanism you're
opting into an alternate loading behavior of the browser.
The standard loading model does not apply any longer.
And one important thing here is that every
URL your application will ever need needs
to be listed in the cache manifest.
With many applications that have been
constructed with modern web practices
and the future of the web in mind, this is easy.
Sometimes it will require reworking
the application a little.
But it is important that you list every URL.
Any URL that's not listed in the manifest will
not be accessible from your web application.
As two types of entries, the explicit entries, these are
the cached entries, these are the things we know we want
to store off line, to be available
all of the time no matter what.
And then it has the online white list entries.
Because we usually do have a network connection.
And we do have to list every URL that our application
might need, we need to list the URLs that should always go
to the network, so they are accessible
to our web application.
Here's a sample manifest file.
You always start it off with the
big all caps phrase cache manifest.
And then you just start listing URLs.
Here's the cache section, this is the explicit section.
Also, it's the default section
You can leave cache off if you want to.
You can see here I have a relative
URL, I've got a fully qualified URL.
I've got a few different kinds of
resources that make up the application.
And I can even grab an off site URL if I'd like.
So any standard web site you could build
here using resources from different domains,
you can do that using the application cache as well.
And then we have our network entries, the dynamic things,
the things it doesn't make sense to store off line,
and we always will need a network connection to use.
And that's it for the text file, that's a list of URLs.
How do we get this into play.
How do we tell the browser, hey, I'm a hot new developer
who is using this great new application cache feature.
I want you to go ahead and get it
from my server and start using it.
I introduce to you the HTML element.
The loneliest of all elements, with no
official specified attributes until now.
Specify the manifest attribute on your HTML at element.
Point it to the manifest file on your server.
And you have now opted into the application cache mechanism.
With one more caveat.
You will have to tweak something on your server.
The server will have to send explicitly the text
cache manifest mime type for the manifest files.
This is an explicit thing that we're
very deliberate about opting into.
Which is why this is required in the
spec. So the loading process changes.
I mentioned this a little while ago.
What is the new loading process when
you're using the application cache.
When your users visit your web application,
the URL for your web application,
the web browser will load all the
resources from the local cache as copied.
It won't even try to get them from the network.
However, that automated update process will kick
off the moment they visit your web application.
Safari will refetch the manifest file
in the background from your web server.
And if it is changed, it will start
revalidating all the resources
that it's caching locally off line
and download them as necessary.
Now when the update is complete, when the new manifest has
been registered and we've downloaded all the new resources
and we have our own off line copy, you can call
a tiny little JavaScript, which I'll show you,
to right in place switch your users over
from Version 1 to Version 2 of your app.
Or the new version will be available
the next time they visit your site.
So the way you do the atomic update explicitly,
so you can use that application cache object,
and listen for the on update ready
event, and pass it an event handler,
and then you just go ahead and call swap cache
. And now you've just in place slid your users over
from Version 1 to Version 2 of your application.
It's pretty cool.
Will -- like I said, will happen automatically if
you don't do that, so you don't even need to do this.
You can listen to a lot of other progress events
about this automated background update process.
So in case you want to -- your application is
huge and complex and you want to present a UI,
or you want to monitor the progress for your
own error handling or statistics gathering,
you could go ahead and listen to all of these great things.
I'm not going to go into detail on them now.
But the documentation on application
cache will tell what they do.
And then we have these online and off
line events, and the status in general.
There's window.navigator on line.
It's a new property on the navigator that will tell
you, hey, am I on line or am I for sure off line.
Go ahead and add an event listener, in case you want
to monitor as the network connection status changes.
One use we've seen is when the device, the -- your user's
machine, whether it's an iPhone or a desktop or a notebook,
when it gets back on line, you'll kick off the
update mechanism manually, even though it's automatic
when they visit the URL, you can
manually kick it off if you'd like.
So it's pretty cool.
That's the application cache.
A standard way to store all of
the different resources that make
up your application off line, inside of the web browser.
Now to show you further augmentation we can do to our way
sweet checkers app, I'd like to invite Beth back on stage.
Beth?
[ Applause ]
>> Thanks, Brady.
So we have this problem.
We just made our checkers web application pretty
recently, and it's a lot more popular than we expected.
And we have kind of a crappy server,
you know, not great bandwidth.
So we're having this problem where a lot of our
users are complaining to us that there's a lot
of lag during peak checker playing hours.
So this is a real problem for us that we want to
address, but we don't really have money to throw
at the problem right now and get
a better server or anything.
So we think that a great solution in
the meantime is off line checkers.
It will make things faster for our users, and they won't
even know what kind of magic we're doing under the covers.
And really, this isn't a meantime kind of thing.
This is a really great feature all the time.
It's great on the desktop, but it's
particularly compelling on the iPhone.
Because on the iPhone you often find yourself
with a really low bandwidth network situation,
like on the beach in Barbados, or in a no
network situation, like on the plane to Barbados,
and in these situations you want
to be able to be playing checkers.
So let's implement off line checkers right now
OK, great.
So as Brady said, we need a manifest
file, which we already put together here.
And we also already took care of tweaking our server.
So the one last thing we have to do is include
the manifest attribute in our source file.
Oops, wrong spot.
There we go.
Save that.
Let's open our checkers game.
Reload it.
OK, so the first load was a regular
network load, and this is an off line load,
and you'll see that I am actually missing a resource here.
So even though I have network enabled right now, I
must have missed that resource in my manifest file.
And because I missed it, then it won't load.
And yes, it looks like I only have
one turn indicator light here.
And I'm supposed to have another one for player 0.
So let me fix this.
Oops. Save that.
Let's reload.
There we go.
So with the reload, I have my turn indicator
light, and I have off line checkers.
And I can still play with it and everything.
I can still access all of my saved games,
see my high scores, and it's pretty sweet.
So now let's take a look at it on the iPhone.
All right, so first I'll take us into
Safari where we can load it there.
So here's my checkers game.
I can play it like always.
Yes. It's always exciting.
So -- but now let's check it out in airplane mode.
And I saved this web application,
so I'm just going to load it again.
Now fully in airplane mode without any network.
All right, reload.
I can still play my checkers game.
[ Applause ]
>> I can access all of my features here too.
And that's it.
Just editing my HTML in one spot and doing a couple
of other little things, we have off line checkers.
>> Great, thank you very much, Beth.
[ Applause ]
>> So with the way we developed our checkers
application from scratch, it was really just a matter
of listing all the URLs in a text
file to make it work off line.
This gives us a few benefits, like Beth said.
It not only works completely off line, like
in airplane mode, or in low bandwidth mode,
like on the beach in Barbados, but even
when a network is completely available.
We're saving server bandwidth, right?
We're avoiding a hit to the server
for all these different resources,
no matter what the HTTP caching
mechanism we wanted to put in place was.
And it's a better loading experience for our users as well.
Which is exactly what I just said, speeds on line loading.
And I already said that at the very beginning too.
Just a few steps to add.
Now one thing we didn't show in the demo is
we had already tweaked our Apache server.
So don't think that I said you have to do that, and
then we left it out, so maybe I was lying to you.
That is important, so we did do that.
But otherwise, just -- that manifest file, and
we're good to go with our off line checkers.
That's all I have to talk to you about today.
Talked a little about the -- little bit
about the current state of data on the web,
an old problem that we finally have new solutions for.
And we went over those new solutions.
The great HTML 5 standard Key/Value storage
integrates into JavaScript beautifully.
The structured databases which gives you the power of an SQL
database inside of your web application using JavaScript.
And finally, the application cache.
A standard way to sort all of the different
resources that make up your application
in a neat little package that's available off line.
For more information, I encourage you to look at
the HTML 5 specs for all of these technologies.
They are kind of spread out over the WG
web site, and the W3C web site right now.
But here's the URLs for them.
We'd love to hear from you at the Web Kit open source
project, both to report bugs, to hear how awesome we are,
to try new nightlies, to interact with the community.
And those cool demos that I showed you.
The off line calendar that we implemented, and the Web Kit
sticky notes demo for some great database code examples.
They're up there.
And we also expect the checkers
demo to be there pretty soon.
Vicki Murley is our Safari Technologies Evangelist, if you
have any questions she'd be happy to answer them by e-mail.